## Tidy Data generated with run_analysis.R
=========

### 1. Download of the data files 
The data used to generate the tidy dataset was obtained from the UCI Machine 
Learning Repository. A zip file containing the data was downloaded from 
"https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip" 
on Sat Apr 26, 2014 at 10:28:30 AM.

### 2. Loading data into R & adding subjects, activities and variables names
The following files were loaded into R using the read.table function:
* X_test.txt (main data file for test dataset)
* y_test.txt (activity labels for test dataset)
* subject_test.txt (subject labels for test dataset)
* X_train.txt (main data file for training dataset)
* y_train.txt (activity labels for training dataset)
* subject_train.txt (subject labels for training dataset)
* features.txt (variable names for main datasets)

The training and test datasets were generated by combining the respective main
data files with the subject and activity labels using the cbind function.

Variable names (Subject, Activity, and the 561 variable names from the features text)
were added with the colnames function.

### 3. Merge the test and training datasets
Test and training datasets were merged using the rbind function.
The resulting dataset contained 10299 observations of 561 variables, each of 
which were associated with a subject and an activity. There were a total of 30 
different subjects and 6 different activities (lying, sitting, standing, walking, 
walking up and walking down) that were performed while wearing a smartphone on 
their waists. The time and frequency domain variables were derived from the phone’s 
accelerometer and gyroscope and there were various replicates for each subject and 
activity. 

### 4. Extract only measurements on mean and sd 
The columns which contained mean or sd values were identified using the grep 
function with the parameter fixed = TRUE to ensure specificity. 
The identified columns were selected by subsetting and were reunited with the
corresponding subjects and activities using the cbind function.
The resulting initial tidy data set was checked for missing values; none were found. 

### 5. Use descriptive activity names to apropriately label the dataset
The description for the numeric activity labels were found in activity_labels.txt
* 1 WALKING
* 2 WALKING_UPSTAIRS
* 3 WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
* 4 SITTING
* 5 STANDING
* 6 LAYING

The numeric activity labels were replaced by the corresponing activity using 
the gsub function with the following changes to the labels:
Activity 2 was coded as "WALKING_UP", activity 3 as 
"WALKING_DOWN" and activity 6 was  was changed from “LAYING” to “LYING”, 
given that this is a dataset with human (rather than chicken) activity.

### 6. Create a second independent tidy data set with averages of each variable for each activity and subject
The variables "Subject" and "Activity" were turned into factors with 30 and 6 
levels, respectively. 

The dataset was reshaped using the reshape2 package. 
First, the data frame was melted using the melt function with "Subject" and "Activity"
as ID variables. 
Then, the dataset was transformed using the dcast function to generate mean values 
for the replicates for each subject and activity. 

The resulting average dataset as well as the initial tidy data set 
were exported into the text files "AVGData.txt" and "TidyData.txt" 
using the write.table function. 


